tools/README.md, before:

# Tools

This folder `tools` contains a suite of Bash scripts for interacting with this repository EPICS Environment (Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System) and analyzing software distributions. These tools are designed to streamline common development and maintenance tasks.

## `pvs_gets.bash`

This script is a versatile utility for interacting with EPICS Channel Access (CA) Process Variables (PVs). It provides a user-friendly way to fetch values from a list of PVs, with options for filtering, continuous monitoring, and managing network settings. It's particularly useful for EPICS developers, operators, and engineers who need to quickly inspect PV values.

### Usage

To run the script, you must provide a PV list file using the `-l` option.

```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash [-l pvlist_file] [-w watch_interval_sec] [-f <filter_string>] [-r <record_field>] [-c] [-n] [-7]
```
* **-l <pvlist_file>:** **(Required)** Specifies a file containing a list of Process Variables, one per line. Blank lines and lines starting with # are ignored.
* **-w <watch_interval_sec>:** Puts the script into a "watch" mode, continuously fetching and displaying the PV values at the specified interval in seconds.
* **-f <filter_string>:** Filters the PV list using a regular expression. Only PVs matching the pattern will be processed.
* **-r <record_field>:** Appends a specific record field to each PV (e.g., `PV.EGU`).
* **-c:** Clears any existing `EPICS_CA_ADDR_LIST` and sets it to the host machine's IP address. This can be useful for resolving connectivity issues.
* **-n:** Disables the use of `EPICS_CA_AUTO_ADDR_LIST`.
* **-7:** Uses the `pvget` command instead of the default `caget` command.

### Examples

1. Get values from a simple PV list file:
```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash -l pvlist_file.txt
```
2. Filter PVs and get a specific record field:

This example gets the EGU (Engineering Units) field for all PVs in `pvlist_file.txt` that contain "Ti" followed by a number from 1 to 8. It also resets the EPICS CA address.
```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash -l pvlist_file.txt -f "Ti[1-8]$" -c -r "EGU"
```

3. Continuously watch PVs with a 5-second interval:

```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash -l pvlist_file.txt -w 5
```

## `check_deps.bash`

This script analyzes the dynamic library dependencies of executable and shared object files. It identifies required libraries (`NEEDED`) and the runtime search paths (`RUNPATH/RPATH`) embedded in the files' headers. The script is particularly useful for verifying the portability and integrity of a software distribution by highlighting potential issues like hardcoded paths especially on Redhat variant OS.

### Usage

To run the script, provide the path to the software distribution as the first command-line argument.

```bash
## Default EPICS-env path
bash check_deps.bash
## Specific path
bash check_deps.bash <path-to-distribution>
bash check_deps.bash -v <path-to-distribution>
bash check_deps.bash --verbose <path-to-distribution>
```

* Example:
If your software distribution is located at `~/alsu-epics-environment/1.1.2/debian-12/7.0.7`, run the script as follows:

```bash
bash tools/check_deps.bash ~/alsu-epics-environment/1.1.2/debian-12/7.0.7/
--------------------------------------------------------
 >> BIN: Total Files with RPATH / ALL:   0 / 156
 >>  SO: Total Files with RPATH / ALL:   0 /  62
--------------------------------------------------------
```

### Features:
* **Dependency Listing:** Lists all executables and shared libraries (`.so`) required by each binary executable and shared library file.
* **Path Analysis:** Identifies and displays the `RUNPATH` and `RPATH` values, which are used by the dynamic linker to find dependencies at runtime.
* **RPATH Warning:** Provides a clear, colored warning if `RPATH` is detected in a file. `RPATH` is generally considered a less flexible and potentially insecure alternative to `RUNPATH`, as it can lead to issues when the software is moved to a different location.
* **Automated Scanning:** The script automatically scans a predefined directory structure (`base`, `modules`, and `vendor`) to find both binary executables and shared library files.

## `prep-vendors.bash`

While `prep-vendors.bash` is capable of orchestrating the full EPICS environment build, its **most critical role is to automate the complex and error-prone process of vendor library setup and integration**. The script's modular commands also offer flexibility: for tasks like new release preparation or standalone testing, developers can choose to focus only on specific steps, such as building the core EPICS environment (`EPICS-env`), rather than rebuilding all vendor libraries.

Using this script, you can easily handle the downloading, configuration, compilation, and installation of external dependencies (`uldaq`, `open62541`) into a consistent path. This frees developers to focus on coding by providing a reliably configured environment.

### Key Automation Features

* **`init`**: **Initial Environment Setup** Creates the necessary temporary working folders and clones the vendor repositories (`uldaq-env` and `open62541-env`) in a single step.
* **`prep-uldaq`**, **`prep-open62541`**: **Vendor Library Preparation** Navigates to the vendor library source, sets the installation path, and sequentially executes `make` rules to complete the library installation.
* **`prep-vendors`**: **Batch Vendor Preparation** Executes both `prep-uldaq` and `prep-open62541` sequentially.
* **`epics-env`**: **EPICS Integration** Automatically detects the installation paths of the vendor libraries and accurately reflects them in the main EPICS environment's `configure/RELEASE.local` file before building.

### Recommended Workflow

The workflow, when focused on vendor library configuration automation, is as follows:

1.  **Initial Setup and Source Acquisition:**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash init
    ```
2.  **Automated Vendor Library Compilation and Installation:**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash prep-vendors
    ```
3.  **Verify Environment Paths:**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash show-env
    ```
4.  **Compile the EPICS Environment (Optional):**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash epics-env
    ```

## `update-release.bash`

This script automates the maintenance of the EPICS `configure/RELEASE` file by keeping module versions synchronized with their upstream Git repositories. It parses the existing release file, queries remote repositories for the latest tags or commit hashes, and generates a detailed summary of changes. This tool is designed to prevent version drift and simplify the tedious process of manual version tracking.

### Usage

To run the script, execute it with one of the available commands. It assumes the `RELEASE` file is located in the standard `configure/` directory.

```bash
bash tools/update-release.bash <command>
```

* **check:** Performs a "dry-run" analysis. It compares local versions against remote HEADs and displays pending updates and GitHub comparison links without modifying any files.
* **update:** Performs the same analysis as `check`, but prompts the user to apply the changes to the `RELEASE` file. A backup is automatically created before overwriting.
* **help:** Displays usage information.

### Examples

1. Check for available updates without making changes:

This command prints a summary of differences, including commit counts and diff links, but leaves the original file untouched.
```bash
bash tools/update-release.bash check
```

2. Update the release file and apply changes:

```bash
bash tools/update-release.bash update
```

### GitHub Token (Recommended)

To avoid GitHub API rate limits (60 req/hr for unauthenticated calls) and to see detailed commit statistics (Date, Author, etc.), setting a `GITHUB_TOKEN` is recommended. The script supports both **Classic** and **Fine-grained** tokens.

```bash
# 1. Set your token (Temporary environment variable)
export GITHUB_TOKEN="github_pat_xxxxxxxxxxxx"

# 2. Run the script
bash tools/update-release.bash check
```

### Features

* **Version Detection:** Intelligently determines whether to use a readable Git Tag (e.g., `tags/R1.2`) or a Short Hash (e.g., `a1b2c3d`) based on the remote repository's state.
* **Visual Diff Links:** Generates direct GitHub "Compare" URLs for every update, allowing maintainers to instantly review code changes between the old and new versions.

Commit message:

add more robust logic to update-release.bash

tools/README.md, after:

# Tools

This folder `tools` contains a suite of Bash scripts for interacting with this repository EPICS Environment (Experimental Physics and Industrial Control System) and analyzing software distributions. These tools are designed to streamline common development and maintenance tasks.

## `pvs_gets.bash`

This script is a versatile utility for interacting with EPICS Channel Access (CA) Process Variables (PVs). It provides a user-friendly way to fetch values from a list of PVs, with options for filtering, continuous monitoring, and managing network settings. It's particularly useful for EPICS developers, operators, and engineers who need to quickly inspect PV values.

### Usage

To run the script, you must provide a PV list file using the `-l` option.

```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash [-l pvlist_file] [-w watch_interval_sec] [-f <filter_string>] [-r <record_field>] [-c] [-n] [-7]
```
* **-l <pvlist_file>:** **(Required)** Specifies a file containing a list of Process Variables, one per line. Blank lines and lines starting with # are ignored.
* **-w <watch_interval_sec>:** Puts the script into a "watch" mode, continuously fetching and displaying the PV values at the specified interval in seconds.
* **-f <filter_string>:** Filters the PV list using a regular expression. Only PVs matching the pattern will be processed.
* **-r <record_field>:** Appends a specific record field to each PV (e.g., `PV.EGU`).
* **-c:** Clears any existing `EPICS_CA_ADDR_LIST` and sets it to the host machine's IP address. This can be useful for resolving connectivity issues.
* **-n:** Disables the use of `EPICS_CA_AUTO_ADDR_LIST`.
* **-7:** Uses the `pvget` command instead of the default `caget` command.

### Examples

1. Get values from a simple PV list file:
```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash -l pvlist_file.txt
```
2. Filter PVs and get a specific record field:

This example gets the EGU (Engineering Units) field for all PVs in `pvlist_file.txt` that contain "Ti" followed by a number from 1 to 8. It also resets the EPICS CA address.
```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash -l pvlist_file.txt -f "Ti[1-8]$" -c -r "EGU"
```

3. Continuously watch PVs with a 5-second interval:

```bash
bash pvs_gets.bash -l pvlist_file.txt -w 5
```

## `check_deps.bash`

This script analyzes the dynamic library dependencies of executable and shared object files. It identifies required libraries (`NEEDED`) and the runtime search paths (`RUNPATH/RPATH`) embedded in the files' headers. The script is particularly useful for verifying the portability and integrity of a software distribution by highlighting potential issues like hardcoded paths especially on Redhat variant OS.

### Usage

To run the script, provide the path to the software distribution as the first command-line argument.

```bash
## Default EPICS-env path
bash check_deps.bash
## Specific path
bash check_deps.bash <path-to-distribution>
bash check_deps.bash -v <path-to-distribution>
bash check_deps.bash --verbose <path-to-distribution>
```

* Example:
If your software distribution is located at `~/alsu-epics-environment/1.1.2/debian-12/7.0.7`, run the script as follows:

```bash
bash tools/check_deps.bash ~/alsu-epics-environment/1.1.2/debian-12/7.0.7/
--------------------------------------------------------
 >> BIN: Total Files with RPATH / ALL:   0 / 156
 >>  SO: Total Files with RPATH / ALL:   0 /  62
--------------------------------------------------------
```

### Features:
* **Dependency Listing:** Lists all executables and shared libraries (`.so`) required by each binary executable and shared library file.
* **Path Analysis:** Identifies and displays the `RUNPATH` and `RPATH` values, which are used by the dynamic linker to find dependencies at runtime.
* **RPATH Warning:** Provides a clear, colored warning if `RPATH` is detected in a file. `RPATH` is generally considered a less flexible and potentially insecure alternative to `RUNPATH`, as it can lead to issues when the software is moved to a different location.
* **Automated Scanning:** The script automatically scans a predefined directory structure (`base`, `modules`, and `vendor`) to find both binary executables and shared library files.

## `prep-vendors.bash`

While `prep-vendors.bash` is capable of orchestrating the full EPICS environment build, its **most critical role is to automate the complex and error-prone process of vendor library setup and integration**. The script's modular commands also offer flexibility: for tasks like new release preparation or standalone testing, developers can choose to focus only on specific steps, such as building the core EPICS environment (`EPICS-env`), rather than rebuilding all vendor libraries.

Using this script, you can easily handle the downloading, configuration, compilation, and installation of external dependencies (`uldaq`, `open62541`) into a consistent path. This frees developers to focus on coding by providing a reliably configured environment.

### Key Automation Features

* **`init`**: **Initial Environment Setup** Creates the necessary temporary working folders and clones the vendor repositories (`uldaq-env` and `open62541-env`) in a single step.
* **`prep-uldaq`**, **`prep-open62541`**: **Vendor Library Preparation** Navigates to the vendor library source, sets the installation path, and sequentially executes `make` rules to complete the library installation.
* **`prep-vendors`**: **Batch Vendor Preparation** Executes both `prep-uldaq` and `prep-open62541` sequentially.
* **`epics-env`**: **EPICS Integration** Automatically detects the installation paths of the vendor libraries and accurately reflects them in the main EPICS environment's `configure/RELEASE.local` file before building.

### Recommended Workflow

The workflow, when focused on vendor library configuration automation, is as follows:

1.  **Initial Setup and Source Acquisition:**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash init
    ```
2.  **Automated Vendor Library Compilation and Installation:**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash prep-vendors
    ```
3.  **Verify Environment Paths:**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash show-env
    ```
4.  **Compile the EPICS Environment (Optional):**
    ```bash
    bash prep-vendors.bash epics-env
    ```
## `update-release.bash`

This script automates the maintenance of the EPICS `configure/RELEASE` file by keeping module versions synchronized with their upstream Git repositories. It parses the existing release file, queries remote repositories for the latest tags or commit hashes, and generates a detailed summary of changes. This tool is designed to prevent version drift and simplify the tedious process of manual version tracking.

### Usage

To run the script, execute it with one of the available commands. You can optionally use the `-v` flag for more detailed output.

```bash
bash tools/update-release.bash [-v|--verbose] <command>
```

* **-v, --verbose:** Enables detailed information fetching via the GitHub API (Commit Date, Author, Message). Without this flag, the script runs in a faster "stats-only" mode, showing only version differences and diff links.
* **check:** Performs a "dry-run" analysis. It compares local versions against remote HEADs and displays pending updates and GitHub comparison links without modifying any files.
* **update:** Performs the same analysis as `check`, but prompts the user to apply the changes to the `RELEASE` file. A backup is automatically created before overwriting.
* **help:** Displays usage information.

### Examples

1. Check for available updates (Fast Mode):

This command prints a summary of differences and diff links but skips detailed commit metadata for speed.
```bash
bash tools/update-release.bash check
```

2. Check for updates with details (Verbose Mode):

This includes commit date, author, and message (requires GitHub API access and is slower due to network requests).
```bash
bash tools/update-release.bash -v check
```

3. Update the release file and apply changes:

```bash
bash tools/update-release.bash update
```

### GitHub Token (Recommended)

To avoid GitHub API rate limits (60 req/hr for unauthenticated calls) and to see detailed commit statistics (Date, Author, etc.) when using verbose mode, setting a `GITHUB_TOKEN` is recommended. The script supports both **Classic** and **Fine-grained** tokens.

```bash
# 1. Set your token (Temporary environment variable)
export GITHUB_TOKEN="github_pat_xxxxxxxxxxxx"

# 2. Run the script with verbose mode
bash tools/update-release.bash -v check
```

### Features

* **Version Detection:** Intelligently determines whether to use a readable Git Tag (e.g., `tags/R1.2`) or a Short Hash (e.g., `a1b2c3d`) based on the remote repository's state.
* **Visual Diff Links:** Generates direct GitHub "Compare" URLs for every update, allowing maintainers to instantly review code changes between the old and new versions.
